The relationship Gogol holds with Maxine represents, as Gogol himself admits, a
departure from the his family, though seemingly a positive one. More
specifically, "his immersion in Maxine's family is a betrayal of his own"
(132). He stays with Maxine and her parents, indulging in their culture and
customs, the thought of seeing his family, or even talking to them, shoved into
the same corner of his thoughts occupied by his abandoned birth name. He knows, or
at least believes, that they wouldn't be amenable to the cultured Western way
of life enjoyed by the Ratliffs, that they wouldn't "[contribute] to one of
their dinner party conversations" (132), or the cultural commentary he enjoys
so much. As such, while he's with Maxine, he utterly abandons his Bengali
heritage, instead opting to adopt that of Maxine's family. He discovers, in
Maxine and her parents, an appreciation of Western culture and customs he has
been deprived of by his parents. With Moushumi, on the other hand, from the
very start of the relationship, he (begrudgingly) embraces the part his family
has to play in it (as does Moushumi). Their very first meeting results from
prodding on the part of their mothers, and their wedding is done in a
traditional Bengali style.  Where Maxine represented escapism to Gogol,
Moushumi represents Gogol's acceptance of his own family, triggered by his
father's sudden and untimely death. The downside, of course, is that Gogol's
relationship with Moushumi represents a sort of compromise with the fully
Westernized person he wants to be, where his relationship with Maxine does not;
on the whole, however, the latter relationship represents enormous personal
growth on the part of Gogol.

The death of Gogol's father is definitely a turning point for him; in the
absence of something he doesn't have, he realizes what he does. The care Gogol
shows for his family after his father dies, along with the symbolism of
breaking up with Maxine, who represents all of his desires for a fully Western
way of life, really seems to inform most of his major decisions going forward.
It seems to make him a much better person, given that he pays any mind to
taking care of (or even talking to) his mother, but it's unfortunate he had to
learn this lesson the way he did. His newfound cultural appreciation and
reverence for the life his father lived might, in the end, be for the best.
