trains in the namesake (motifs)
-> train that nearly killed ashoke
-> -> prompted him to move to America
-> someone gets murdered on a train Ashoke was on with his family, going to
   Agra in India
-> ashima leaves shopping bags on train, first accidentally and then on purpose
   after her father dies
-> -> a train carries away ashima's gift for her father; symbolism?
-> gogol meets ruth on a train
-> train arrives late (there was a suicide on the train)? worries gogol's father
-> gogol's family waving after him as train leaves
-> gogol finds out moushumi is having an affair on a train

-> trains represent the forward progression of life, and more specifically, our
   inability to stop it

The presence of trains in Jhumpa Lahiri's The Namesake is pervasive; by the end
of the book, the symbolism practically bounds out of the pages, weaving itself
through the climax about as subtly as a train might. It is at this point that
Gogol finds out, sitting across from his wife Moushumi on a train, that she has
been having an affair. "It had been on the train, exactly a year ago that he'd
learned of Moushumi's affair", the telling begins, ending swiftly in a couple
paragraphs with a description of Gogol awestruck by Venician architecture on
his vacation (Lahiri 259). The slightly resigned and curt fashion of the
storytelling in this passage, and more importantly the consistent presence of
trains throughout the book, reveals its underlying message. Trains in The
Namesake appear to represent the inevitable, unstoppable forward progression of
life, with all the critical events that, for better or worse, we must
experience within it.

Returning to the few paragraphs describing Gogol's discovery of Moushumi's
affair, we see that the train setting plays an explicit role in the way the
climactic reveal unfolds. That Gogol is trapped in a traincar with a wife he no
longer loves, and who no longer loves him, barreling towards a Christmas party
with a mother and sister who Moushumi no longer deserves to see, serves to
amplify the grating sense of closure Gogol experiences. That is, the events of
the passage represent the inevitable conclusion of the pieces of evidence
scattered throughout the past several months of their marriage, with Gogol
"feel[ing] the chill of her secrecy [...] he remembered a night weeks ago;
looking through her bag [...] he'd pulled out her diaphragm case" (Lahiri 259).
Sitting in a traincar with Moushumi, the train binds Gogol to this revelation,
forcing him to confront (and eventually accept) it. Furthermore, barreling
towards his mother and sister for Christmas, where he must play the part of a
happy son and brother, the train nudges Gogol nearly immediately into
contending with the destruction of his marriage, and looking to happier times
beyond.

Several other incidents, scattered through Gogol's childhood and undergraduate
years, become significant when establishing the symbolism behind trains. On one
particular instance, Gogol meets his first partner, Ruth, reflecting years
later that "boarding the train it is impossible not to think of the afternoon
[...] they'd met" (Lahiri 114). On another, Ashima steps off a train without
the paintbrushes she had bought for her dead father, "left purposely beneath
her seat" (Lahiri 49). In yet another, the train stops for an hour because "a
suicide had been committed, a person had jumped in front of the train" (Lahiri
114). These events are not worth mentioning because they are individually
significant, as the last one was, but because they reinforce the connection
between the symbolism of trains and the unstoppable progression of life. More
specifically, all three of these events represent a critical phase of life: the
first, the start of a first relationship, the second, the death of a parent,
and the third, straightforwardly, death. In all these, the nature of the train
plays an essential role. In the first, the confined, chaotic character of the
train in bringing together a random assortment of people destined for the same
location culminates in Gogol and Ruth's meeting. In the second, the finality of
the train in departing (that is, the train will never turn back after doing so)
represents Ashima beginning to accept her father's death. More morbidly, in the
third, the monolithic, unrelenting force of the train results in its taking of
a life, the train itself being physically unfazed by this. These examples serve
to relate the qualities of the train to those of the elements of life they
imitate, and in hindsight further act to symbolically solidify the train as a
representation of the dispassionate onward march of life.

Finally, Ashoke's train accident, too, gains further meaning in the light of
the rest of the book. He is on his way to see his grandfather, resolved to
spend the rest of his life with his family in India and leave the remainder of
the world to books, when the train derails, taking the car Ashoke is in with
it. We gain meaning from this event when it becomes apparent that, just as
Ashoke's train was derailed, so too were his previous plans. He departs for
America as soon as he recovers from his injuries, having "imagined not only
walking, but walking away, as far as he could from the place in which he was
born and in which he had nearly died" in his year bedridden after the accident
(Lahiri 24). In other words, given the evidence throughout the rest of the book
that trains symbolize the constant forward progress of life, the destruction of
this normally unstoppable object represents a destruction of the life Ashoke
had envisioned for himself, and in his narrow escape from the wreckage, the
forging of a new one.
