Point of View

-> 'and I went back to my butterfly'

-> scenes of exploration into Pnin's thoughts (and his son (Victor)'s dreams)

-> -> ie, when Pnin sees the red squirrel in the park and flashes back to the
red squirrel on his bed's headboard(?) during his childhood, while he was sick

-> -> alternatively, when Victor dreams about being the son of a king

-> Pnin calls narrator a liar (Paris?)

-> "a letter he had written, with my help" in first chapter (first instance of
first person? narrator lying about helping write letter?)

-> "narrator's art of integrating telephone conversations" -> -> the narrator
becomes self conscious at this point

-> place where narrator almost reveals his identity while discussing liza?

-> we expect an omniscient narrator to be reliable, but the narrator of Pnin is
not



Helplessly looking on as the heart-rending story unfolds, readers of Pnin
witness the misfortunes and misadventures of its aptly named main character
through the seemingly omniscient eye of a narrator who, for much of the story,
appears to value their anonymity. This air of mystery is lifted in the final
chapter when the narrator sheds his veil and reveals himself to be none other
than Vladimir Vladimirovich (Nabokov?), an insectophile character introduced
only a few chapters earlier, and whose identity had been hinted at then, with
the narrator saying that he "went back to [his] butterfly" in one instance. In
these last several pages, the apparent omniscience of the narrator displayed
within those preceding is not only lost, but thrown into question, introducing
(inviting) a new perspective on the events of the book as related by him. The
strange 'first person omniscient' narration employed through the portion of the
book prior to this jarring revelation takes on an almost uncanny tone; there
is, at certain points, a sense of the author peering over the shoulder of the
reader and mischievously adding their own tinge to the story.  This whimsical
embellishment of the tale, or at least the creeping tingle of it throughout,
culminates in a curious relationship between the contents of the book and the
point of view used within it.

That is, we expect traditional omniscient narration to nominally reflect
reality (even if it generally does not), and with the absence in Pnin (prior to
Chapter 7) of much evidence to indicate otherwise, the reader happily gobbles
this up. However, come Chapter 7 and its illumination of the man behind the
curtain, the loose threads of the rest of the narrative begin to show,
beckoning the reader to tug on them. And should they indulge, they might find
that the narrator is a liar. Firstly, and most directly, Pnin calls him one,
telling a mutual acquaintance during a dinner in Paris that he shouldn't
'believe a word he says [...]. He makes up everything. [...] He is a dreadful
inventor' (7.49). This accusation is granted further purchase retroactively,
during the scenes in which the narrator enters the (fever) dreams of Pnin,
describing in flowery detail the wallpaper in Pnin's childhood bedroom, how 'he
had always been able to see that in the vertical plane a combination made up of
three different clusters of purple flowers and seen different oak leaves was
repeated a number of times with soothing exactitude' (2.29). The content of the
scene here is not as important as the realization that it should not exist; the
likelihood that Pnin related this at some point to the narrator, who went on to
convey it to the reader, is extremely low.

Pnin is not, however, the only character whose innermost thoughts are subjected
to the narrator's supreme powers of description; the reader also catches a
glimpse of Victor's dreams at the beginning of Chapter 4(?), where Victor
fantasizes about "[t]he King, his [adoptive] father, wearing a very white
sports shirt open at the throat and a very black blazer" (4.1). This, in
hindsight, categorically indicts what remains of the honesty of the narrator,
while introducing for the reader a new perspective on perspective. More
specifically, the betrayal by the narrator of commonly held assumptions about
omniscient storytelling, namely, that they are generally told in the third
person, and that they generally tell the truth, may represent a satirization of
the free indirect style that characterizes modern fiction. Where free indirect
style arises from a need for a third person narrator to integrate the
character's consciousness into a scene, the first person narrator in Pnin
feigns entering a character merely to elaborate on a scene for which they
presumably lack the requisite (truthful) information to provide a vibrant
enough view of it. In other words, instead of going 'close to the character' to
provide a richer, truer picture of the plot, the reader of Pnin is narrated a
lie (though usually a strikingly beautiful one), perhaps because the narrator
believes it sounds better that way. This has the comical effect for the reader,
on reaching the final few pages of a fictional universe about which they have
been hoodwinked into caring, of imposing on them a sneaking suspicion that much
of what they have just read has been a tall tale(?remove ths sent).
