Jhumpa Lahiri's story of the coming of age of a second generation Indian
American demonstrates an attention to detail which acts as the foundation for a
degree of authenticity most (if not all) authors without an Indian heritage may
find out of reach. This is not necessarily because these details and cultural
milestones are jealously guarded secrets, only available by birthright to those
thrust by destiny into an Indian (American) home. Rather, this would be because
the content of the book comprises what would be, quite straightforwardly, a
depiction of "a real culture of community other than her own" (23), and a
relatively harmful variant of it at that. In the description of the initiation
of an arranged marriage (between Ashoke and Ashima), for instance, an author
without significant Indian cultural footing might easily slip into a narrative
that reinforces harmful stereotypes about Indian marital customs. To be clear,
this is not veiled support of those customs, on which there is widespread
disagreement between Indians, but an emphasis that judgements about it belong,
as the custom itself does, to the Indian cultural community. Given India's
history of Western (British) colonization, it would be particularly offensive
for such a judgement to come from a writer culturally rooted in the West. The
author of the article says as much, expressing that those cultures which the
West has historically dominated, largely falling under the West's cultural lens
of Orientalism, may be afforded considerations regarding appropriation that
certain others may not. Bluntly, the difference between a Western author
appropriating a firmly Western text versus a West African text is that "at
certain points in history, our [Western] nations have literally bought and sold
West Africans" (30). Specifically, the Western author acts from a culturally
privileged place and deprives the victim culture of its exclusive right to
(discourse regarding) its own objects, moreover risking "becoming the
authenticating narrative for the reading public" (25 + 1), perhaps because of the
increased appeal to Western readers of authors with whom they identify. In this
way, the Western author may truly steal control over certain cultural elements
from the original culture, completing the appropriative act and reinforcing the
structure of power surrounding Western culture.
