Quotes:

"It only takes a single night of frost to kill off a generation [of
butterflies]. To live, then, is a matter of time, of timing."

"Female monarchs lay eggs along the route. Every history has more than one
thread, each thread a story of division. The journey takes four thousand eight
hundred and thirty miles, more than the length of this country. The monarchs
that fly south will not make it back north. Each departure, then, is final.
Only their children return; only the future revisits the past."

"If we are lucky, the end of the sentence is where we might begin. If we are
lucky, something is passed on, another alphabet written in the blood, sinew,
and neuron; ancestors charging their kin with the silent propulsion to fly
south, to turn toward the place in the narrative no one was meant to outlast"

"I can't tell you why some monarchs, on their way south, simply stop flying,
their wings all of a sudden too heavy, not entirely their own--and fall away,
deleting themselves from the story"

The exhaustion of being an immigrant

"Maybe we'll be the opposite of buffaloes. We'll grow wings and spill over the
cliff as a generation of monarchs, heading home. Green Apple."

"The butterfly tumbles the length of the yard, its wings resembling the corner
of Toni Morrison's Sula I dog-eared so many times the tiny ear broke off one
morning in New York, fluttered down the liquid winter avenue. It was the part
where Eva pours gasoline on her drug-doomed son and lights the match in an act
of love and mercy I hope to both be capable of--and never know"

"It's not a monarch--just a weak white blur ready to die in the first frost"

"they ignite into the ochre-red sparks of monarchs"

Essay:

Butterflies in Ocean Vuong's On Earth We're Briefly Gorgeous present a somber
perspective on the essence of the American immigrant experience, and more
specifically, the selfless act of raising an immigrant family. As a second
generation immigrant myself, the story of Little Dog and his mother's struggle
for survival in a land largely deaf to their words was not unknown to me. As
the book drew to a close, Vuong's vivid and poetic imagery racing through my
mind, I saw in the self-sacrificial-yet-hopeful nature of the butterflies the
true weight and meaning of Little Dog's relationship with his mother and
grandmother (and, in this, parallels with my relationship with my parents). In
particular, I saw in the symbol of the butterflies that the collective pain and
suffering endured by Lan, in raising a child in the wartorn ruins of her
country, and by Rose, in raising a child in the unfamiliar surroundings of
another, were not for naught. Each suffered so that the next generation might
not, so that they might have a chance at a better life, in a process that bears
striking similarity to the cross-generational flight of Monarch Butterflies. By
analyzing their appearance in On Earth We're Briefly Beautiful, I was able to
view Little Dog's upbringing not merely as the coming-of-age story that it is,
but as the fruit of the cross-generational sacrifice that it represents.

On the last page of the book, as Little Dog runs through a field, he returns to
the image of the buffaloes running, to their deaths, off a cliff. This time,
however, the buffaloes transform into moose, then dogs, then macaques, before
finally "ignit[ing] into the ochre-red sparks of Monarchs" (Vuong 157). We see
in the buffaloes' subversion of their deaths Little Dog's subversion of his.
More specifically, we might interpret Vuong's vivid imagery here as Little
Dog's deliverance from the suffering endured by Rose and Lan for his sake.
While the people that raised him have willingly stepped off the cliffs in front
of them with the knowledge that it was the only way forward, Little Dog may,
because of their support, have a chance to do otherwise. He continues running
through the field, seeing "[t]housands of monarchs pour over the edge", and
runs "as if [his] cliff was never written into the story" (Vuong 157). The
contrast displayed here with the images of cliffs in the preceding chapters
reinforces

As "[t]housands of monarchs pour over the edge", Little Dog runs through a
field "as if his cliff was never written into the story" (Vuong 157).

"thousands of monarchs pour[ing] over the edge, fan[ing] into the white air
[...] I race through the field as if my cliff was never written into the story"
