We talked about you, about your nightmares, your loosening mind, his face troubled as he listened, which made his pout more defined

language

mother monster terminology reclaiming

language of creativity language of regeneration

'power of the concept of a word':

returning to his house after trevor's death due to opoid issues... wishes for a
word to describe everything?

"It's in these moments, next to you, that I envy words for doing what we can
never do--how they can tell all of themselves simply by standing still, simply
by being"

juxtaposition of opoid issues and buffaloes
"You don't have to be like the buffaloes. You can stop."
juxtaposition of family (mom, grandmother, grandfather?) and butterflies
"A butterfly, pinked by the hour"

"I gave you the table, Ma--which is to say I handed you my rainbow cow, pulled
out of the wastebasket when Mr. Zappadia wasn't looking. How the colors moved
and crinkled in your hands. How I tried to tell you but did not have the
language you would understand. Do you understand? I was a gaping would in the
middle of America and you were inside me asking, Where are we? Where are we,
baby?"

The gaping wound here is the treatment of creativity by the teacher? maybe

"I know he never told you--because he would have had to explain his abstract and
implacable love of the trumpet in a language he would falter in" (about Little
Dog's grandfather)

Little Dog: "You ever think about those buffaloes on the Discovery Channel? I
             mean, how they keep running off those cliffs?"

Trevor: "It ain't up to them where they go. It's Mother Nature. She tells them
         to jump and they go on and do it. They don't got no choice about it.
         It's just the law of nature."

Little Dog: "The law [...] Like they're just following their loved ones, like
             their family's just going forward and they go with them?"

"I race through the field as if my cliff was never written into this story, as
if I was no heavier than the words in my name. And like a word, I hold no
weight in this world yet still carry my own life. And I throw it ahead of me
until what I left behind becomes exactly what I'm running toward--like I'm part
of a family"

"For a moment almost too brief to matter, this made sense--that three people on
the floor, connected to each other by touch, made something like the word
'family'"

"But why can't the language for creativity be the language of regeneration"



TITLE

"All this time I told myself we were born from war--but I was wrong, Ma. We
were born from beauty."
